

===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
Wärtsilä Finland Oy Tel: +358 10 709 0000 www.wartsila.com 
P.O. Box 244 (Teollisuuskatu 1)   
FI-65101 Vaasa 
INSTRUCTIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
For your information 
Engines concerned 
Following 4 -stroke engines  running on 
Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) or Light Fuel Oil 
(LFO): 
• WÄRTSILÄ® Vasa 32, 32GD, 32LN, 
32LNGD 
• WÄRTSILÄ® 20, 20DF 
• WÄRTSILÄ® 25, 25DF 
• WÄRTSILÄ® 31, 31DF 
• WÄRTSILÄ® 32, 32DF, 32GD 
• WÄRTSILÄ® 34DF 
• WÄRTSILÄ® 46, 46GD,  
• WÄRTSILÄ® 46F, 46FDF  
• WÄRTSILÄ® 46TS, 46TS-DF 
• WÄRTSILÄ® 50, 50DF 
Reference  
18 Lubricating oil system 
10.3 Lubricating oil system 
Introduction  
These instructions are intended as a guide 
for analysing and following up procedures 
for the lubricating oil, in order to keep the 
oil condition at satisfactory levels, from the 
engines point of view. 
The purpose is to increase the availability 
and reliability of the engines and avoid 
unnecessary wear and possible failures 
due to use of inferior quality lubricating 
oils. 
Validity  
Until further notice. Replacing issue 6 dated 
23 March 2023. 
 
Before taking any action, always check the available 
online systems for the latest revision of this document. 
Any locally stored or printed version is considered to 
be an uncontrolled document. 
Issue 7, 23 July 2024 
Lubricating oil analysing and 
quality follow-up 
 Distribution to operators and owners of installations 
concerned 
 
WT98Q001 4-Stroke Engines 
Technical Services 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q001, Issue 7, Page 2 / 9 
Document history 
Issue Date Description 
1 27-03-2003 Initial release 
2 21-08-2003 Engine types added 
3 16-10-2003 Text updated 
4 27-09-2012 Engine types specified, text updated 
5 17-05-2016 Wärtsilä 31 added 
6 09-03-2023 • “Lubricating oil maintenance recommendations” on page 6 added  
• Wärtsilä 46TS and 34DF added.  
7 23-07-2024 Wärtsilä 25 added  
Introduction 
The lubricating oil in a modern diesel engine has a variety of different functions, of which 
the most important in addition to lubrication are to: 
• Reduce friction. 
• Prevent metal to metal contact. 
• Prevent corrosion. 
• Act as a cooling media. 
• Improve engine cleanliness. 
• Act as a sealing media. 
These instructions are intended as a guide for analysing and following up procedures for 
the lubricating oil, in order to keep the oil condition at satisfactory levels, from the engines 
point of view. Deteriorated physical and chemical properties may have significant effect 
on the performance of the lubricating oil in the above listed functions, resulting in 
considerably decreased component service lifetimes, increased risk of failures, etc. 
negative consequences for the operating of the engine. 
Recommendation 
Table 1 on page 3  presents a summary of the condemning limits and recommended 
levels for optimum performance for used lubricating oils, along with the main impacts on 
the engine performance.  
Typical wear elemental contents for WÄRTSILÄ ® medium speed d iesel engines are 
presented in T able 2 on page 7. Each of the properties listed in these tables are also 
discussed in more detail in the chapters below. 
Sampling 
The lubricating oil samples are to be taken from circulating oil with the engine in 
operation. The sample should be taken after the separation and filtration of the oil, before 
the engine. It is recommended to take lubricating oil samples before adding (topping up) 
new oil to the system. Use clean sample bottles and rinse the sampling line properly 
before taking the sample, a suitable sample amount is 0.75 - 1 litres. The background 
data needed for evaluating the analysis results should always be provided w ith an oil 
sample, use for example the document WT98V001 Oil analysis application.  
During the first year of operation lubricating oil samples are to be taken at intervals of 
500 operating hours and analysed. Frequent lubricating oil sampling and analysing every 
500 - 1000 hours is also recommendable after the first year of operation. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q001, Issue 7, Page 3 / 9 
Analysis 
The lubricating oil samples should be analysed for example by the oil supplier or by some 
other recognised oil analysis laboratory. The preferred analysis methods are specified in 
Table 1. 
Table 1, Summary of the most important lubricating oil properties 
Property Impacts on engine function Condemning limit Recommended level for 
optimum performance 
Base Number (BN) 
(mg KOH / g)  
ASTM D 2896 
Prevents corrosion. 
 
Min. 20 (HFO operation).  
Max. 50% depletion from 
fresh oil level (LFO 
operation). 
Min. 25 (HFO operation).  
Max. 40% depletion from 
fresh oil level (LFO 
operation). 
Viscosity 
(cSt, at 100C) 
ASTM D 445 
Provides hydrodynamic lubrication 
for bearings, etc. 
Reduces friction and thus fuel oil 
consumption. 
Max. –20% or +25% from 
fresh oil levels, at 100C. 
Max. –25% or +45% from 
fresh oil levels, at 40C. 
Max. 15% from fresh oil 
levels, at 100C. 
Max.  25% from fresh oil 
levels, at 40C. 
Water 
(vol-%) or (w-%) 
ASTM D 95 or 
D 6304C 
Introduces corrosion. 
Deteriorates the hydrodynamic 
properties of the oil. 
Affects additive function. 
Max 0.3 vol-% / w-%. Max 0.3 vol-% / w-%. 
Insolubles 
(w-%) 
ASTM D 893b 
Deteriorates the hydrodynamic 
properties of the oil. 
Affects additive function. 
Max. 2.0 w-%, as 
n-pentane insolubles. 
Max. 1.0 w-%, as 
n-pentane insolubles. 
Flash point 
(C) 
ASTM D 92 or D 93 
Risk of crankcase explosion. Min. 170C (PMCC) 
Min. 190C (COC) 
Min. 170C (PMCC) 
Min. 190C (COC) 
Base number, BN (Total Base Number) 
Base number is a measure of the alkalinity of lubricating oil, expressed in mg KOH/g oil. 
The sulphur level in the fuel oil used determines the required degree of alkalinity of 
lubricating oil. The fuel sulphur is during the combustion process converted into acidic 
combustion products, mainly sulphur oxides. These acidic compounds will attack  the 
combustion space and other engine components unless neutralised.  
Too low base number levels in lubricating oil will lead to acidic corrosion, increased 
engine wear, reduced component lifetime and thus increased maintenance costs. Too 
high base number may, theoretically lead to an increased risk of excessive deposit 
formations, but with modern lubricating oils and engines this is however a very rarely met 
problem. 
It is recommended to use BN 50 - 55 oils when operating on HFO with sulphur levels  
> 2 w-%, especially for engines with wet sump. BN 30 oils are recommended only for 
special applications, for example for installations equipped with SCR units, where high 
BN oils could contribute to deposit formations in the catalyst layers. 
Typically the BN of lubricating oil drops quite fast in the beginning but gradually levels 
out towards an equilibrium level. The minimum allowed BN level for HFO operation is 20 
and for LFO engines 50% depletion from fresh oil levels. 
The recommended minimum BN level for optimum performance  of the lubricating oil in 
the engine is 25 for HFO operation  and 40% depletion from fresh oil levels for LFO 
operation. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q001, Issue 7, Page 4 / 9 
Viscosity 
Viscosity is the property of a fluid that causes flow resistance. The viscosity of oils is 
dependent on temperature, pressure, and shear rate. Viscosity is one of the most 
significant properties for establishing the thickness, pressure, and temperature of an oil 
film in lubrication. Oil film thickness increases with viscosity, as does the fluids friction 
and consequential power loss. Viscosity is also a significant factor in predicting the 
performance and fatigue life of bearings and gears.  
The official SI unit of kinematic viscosity is m2/s, but cSt (centistoke) is still commonly 
used for expressing lubricating oil viscosity. 1 cSt = 10 -6 m2/s (= 1 mm2/s).  
Typical viscosity for a fresh SAE 40 grade lubricating oil is 13.5 – 15.0 cSt (at 100 °C) 
and 135 – 150 cSt (at 40 °C). 
Viscosity Index (VI) is a commonly used expression of an oils change of viscosity with 
temperature. The higher the viscosity index the smaller the relative change in viscosity 
with temperature. Most medium speed diesel engine oils have a VI between 95 and 110. 
Typically the viscosity of lubricating oils could be expected to increase gradually during 
operation, due to oxidation and polymerisation of the lubricating oil compounds, increase 
of solid contents in the oil, etc. Possible reasons for unexpected viscosit y decreases 
could be for example LFO contamination of the lubricating oil. 
The lubricating oil condemning limits for WÄRTSILÄ® medium speed diesel engines for 
the viscosity are: 
• Max. – 20% decrease or + 25% increase from fresh oil levels, at 100 °C. 
• Max. – 25% decrease or + 45% increase from fresh oil levels, at 40 °C.  
The recommended viscosity changes for optimum performance  of the lubricating oil in 
the engine are: 
• Max. ± 15% from fresh oil levels, at 100 °C. 
• Max. ± 25% increase from fresh oil levels, at 40 °C. 
Water 
Water in oil is detrimental to lubrication, both physically and chemically. Water is slightly 
soluble in base oils and slightly more soluble (a few hundred ppm) in formulated oils. 
Generally the solubility of water in lubricating oils is however, due to the polar 
characteristics of the water molecule, low. If increased amounts of water molecules are 
present the oil gets saturated and free water appears. Hazy oil  is most often a result of 
not dissolved water droplets.  
Water corrodes many common tribological metals and may thus also contribute to 
various forms of corrosive and cavitation damages on bearing surfaces. Bearings 
consisting mostly of lead and tin are quite easily oxidised in the presence of water and 
oxygen. Corrosion products may also contribute to the solid debris in the oil and pit 
formation in the metal surfaces. Another indication of water contamination in lubricating 
oils may be increased sodium and chlorine contents, especially in marine applications.  
Water also catalyses oil oxidation and acid formation and may react with or precipitate 
the oil additive compounds, the base oil and with suspended contaminants. The effects 
of all these reactions are undesirable by -products such as varnish, lacquer, sludg e, 
organic and inorganic acids, surface deposits and lubricant thickening (polymerisation). 
These reaction products also consume the oxidation inhibitors of the lubricating oil.  
  

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q001, Issue 7, Page 5 / 9 
Observe that some water analysis methods may result in higher values than the 
recommended distillation (ASTM D 95) method. For example IR (Infrared spectroscopy) 
methods used by some laboratories, especially for so called "fast analyses", have 
typically be en found to result in slightly higher (~0.1 – 0.2 vol -%) levels than the 
distillation method. A simple test for water in oil is the "crackle test", where a drop of oil 
is placed onto a hot surface, if it crackles and sputters too high quantities of water m ay 
be present in the oil. 
The maximum allowed water content in the engine lubricating oil is 0.3 vol-% (or weight-
%). 
Insolubles 
Hard solid particles, which may be present in lubricating oil systems are for example 
shop debris such as welding or grinding splatter (in new systems), sand, clay, etc. earth 
materials and wear fragments. If their size is close to the oil film thickness, they may 
embed or abrade surfaces, thus reducing component lifetime. Abrasion can be detected 
on a worn part by observation of parallel scratches in the direction of sliding or by 
microchips and abrasive particles presence in the used oil.  
Semi-solid contaminants are generally oxidation and/or thermal polymerisation products, 
carbonaceous material, microorganisms and oil/ additive/water reaction products, etc. In 
lubricated systems, these and other small particulates contribute to sludge, wh ich 
collects and plugs pipes, pumps and orifices possibly resulting in too low oil flow. If there 
are oxidation products present, they can be measured by an increase in TAN, pentane- 
and toluene insolubles, IR spectrums and the amount of filter residue.  
TAN tests and filter residues do not necessarily measure the actual lubricant degradation 
products, but rather the presence of a semi -solid materials, and the evaluator has to 
make a judgement on the source. 
The maximum allowed insolubles level is 2.0 w-% (as n-pentane insolubles).  
The recommended insolubles level for optimum performance of the lubricating oil in the 
engine is < 1.0 w-% (as n-pentane insolubles). 
Flash point 
The flash point analysis is mainly a safety concern. A low flash point indicates presence 
of light, easily evaporating hydrocarbon compounds in the lubricating oil. This increases 
the risk of crankcase explosions and engine failures. 
The minimum allowed flash point is 170 °C for the Pensky-Martens closed cup (PMCC) 
analysis method and 190 °C for the Cleveland open cup (COC) analysis method. 
 
  

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q001, Issue 7, Page 6 / 9 
Lubricating oil maintenance recommendations. 
In practice many lubricating oil properties are showing exponential behaviour for different 
properties as function of oil operating hours, so that the change is faster in the beginning 
and then its levelling out towards an equilibrium level. See for exampl e schematic 
example for BN depletion in figure 1 below.  
Figure 1. Typical examples for BN depletion, for different conditions.   
 
Main factors affecting the different properties depletion rate are for example specific 
lubricating oil consumption, specific lubricating oil volume, fuel quality (sulphur, ash, 
MCR, etc.) and lubricating oil base oil & additives package. Additionally ther e are 
numerous other engine operating, ambient condition and lubricating oil specific factors 
that affect the practical depletion rates. Thus it is not possible to calculate or predict any 
general lubricating oil depletion rates, but these have to be check ed and verified by 
frequent enough and engine specific lubricating oil analyses. A good target is to maintain 
lubricating oil properties according to “Recommended level for optimum performance” 
levels presented in table 1.     
When operating on bad quality HFO (HFO 2 in fuel specifications) experience tells that 
a specific lubricating oil consumption of 0.5 g/kWh, calculated based on MCR (max 
continuous rating), or higher is typically needed in order to keep the lubricating oil in good 
condition.  
Elemental analysis 
Elements are here divided into four groups according to their origin. However, note that 
some elements belong to several groups and that different construction materials may 
be used in different engine types, i.e. component specifications should be checked  in 
each case, before making any detailed conclusions. 
1. Wear metals 
The most common wear metals in lubricating oil analyses are iron (Fe), chromium 
(Cr), lead (Pb), copper (Cu) and tin (Sn). In the engine components there can also be 
smaller amounts of aluminium (Al), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni) and antimony (Sb) 
present. 
The iron content in lubricating oils reflects mainly piston and cylinder liner wear. Fresh 
oil may also contain a small amount (< 15 ppm)  of iron, originating from transfer 
pipelines or tanks, if the oil is not delivered as a bulk. Note that iron may also be used 
as an additive in some lubricating oil formulations. 
The chromium content in lubricating oils indicates mainly piston ring wear. 


===== PAGE 7 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q001, Issue 7, Page 7 / 9 
Lead can be present in the overlays of gudgeon pin bearing bushings, camshaft 
bearings, bearing bushing for camshaft end and thrust washer.  
Copper can enter the lubricating oil from lubricating oil pump bearings, bronze 
bearings of rocker arms, roller pins for tappets and gudgeon pin bearing bushings. If 
the Cu content is abnormally high (> 10 - 15 ppm), the reason is probably presence 
of exhaust gas in the inlet air, for example due to exhaust gas leakage, recirculation 
or from external sources. If there are exhaust gases present in the inlet air, the sulphur 
compounds from the exhaust gases will gradu ally corrode the charge air cooler 
material, which contains copper. The copper will then enter the lubricant via the 
combustion space and blow -by gases to the crankcase. In these cases, the Cu 
content of the lubricating oil can be even as high as 30 - 50 ppm. 
Possible sources for tin are big end bearings, main bearings, gudgeon pin bearing 
bushings, camshaft bearings, bearing bushing of camshaft end and thrust washer.  
The most probable source for aluminium and nickel is the fuel (HFO), but (Al + Si) 
may also enter the lubricating oil from engine parts. 
2. Fuel oil originating elements 
The source of vanadium (V) and nickel (Ni) is normally HFO. There may also be small 
amounts of these elements present in LFO. The lubricating oil vanadium and nickel 
contents normally achieve an equilibrium, which are 1 - 2 times the V and Ni contents 
of the fuel. 
The source of aluminium (Al) and silicon (Si) is normally HFO. Oil refineries equipped 
with a fluid catalytic cracker (FCC) unit use zeolites (aluminium and silicon 
compounds) as catalysts. Occasionally some catalyst rests ("cat fines" = Al + Si), can 
be present in fuels and thus enter the lubricating oil during operation. Silicon is also 
typically used as an antifoaming component in lubricating oils. 
The source of sodium (Na) is normally HFO, but presence of sodium can also indicate 
sea water leakage, through the central coolers or water leakage in the closed cooling 
water system. The most commonly used cooling water additives are sodium nitrite + 
sodium borate and sodium molybdate based products. 
3. Water originating elements 
Sodium, see above. 
4. Lubricating oil additives 
Calcium (Ca), phosphorus (P) and zinc (Zn) are normally used in lubricating oil 
additive packages. The calcium content is depending on the BN, the higher the BN 
the higher the Ca content. For example, a BN 30 oil contains Ca ~ 1.0 – 1.1 w-% and 
high BN (50 - 55) oils contain Ca ~ 1.8 – 2.0 w-%.  
The phosphorus and zinc contents are depending on the additive chemistry used in 
each specific case and can vary significantly. In most lubricating oils used in the 
WÄRTSILÄ® medium-speed diesel engines the P content of the fresh oil is 200 - 1000 
ppm and the Zn content 200 - 1100 ppm. In used lubricating oils these values can be 
somewhat lower. 
Silicon, see above. 
  

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q001, Issue 7, Page 8 / 9 
Typical elemental contents in used oils 
Table 2 presents the typical contents of different elements in used lubricating oils, 
recorded from both HFO and LFO operated engines. The table also shows guidance 
values for what can be considered abnormal levels for different elements in used oils. 
The limits in Table 2 should be kept as guidelines only. Elemental concentrations above 
the abnormal levels call for attention and indicate that something abnormal is obviously 
happening in the engine or in the lubricating oil system. An engine inspection is worth to 
consider especially if the values being abo ve the abnormal levels show a continuously 
increasing trend.  
It should be noted that typical elemental concentrations may be slightly different for 
different engine types. Differences can also be found depending on engine application 
(power plant, main engine, auxiliary engine, etc.). The fuel quality and the fuel elemental 
composition also influence on the concentration of fuel originated elements in used 
lubricating oils. 
Table 2, Typical and abnormal contents of different elements in used lubricating oils  
Element Unit HFO,  
Typical values 
HFO,  
Abnormal level 
LFO,  
Typical values 
LFO, 
Abnormal level 
Iron, Fe ppm 10 - 40 > 50 5 - 15 > 25 
Chromium, Cr ppm 0 - 3 > 5 0 - 3 > 5 
Tin, Sn ppm 0 - 3 > 5 0 - 3 > 5 
Lead, Pb ppm 0 - 3 > 5 0 - 3 > 5 
Copper, Cu ppm 0 - 5 > 10 0 - 3 > 5 
Silicon, Si ppm 10 - 40 < 5 or > 50 1 - 15 > 20 
Sodium, Na ppm 10 - 50 > 100 0 - 10 > 20 
Aluminium, Al ppm 0 - 10 > 20 0 - 5 > 10 
Vanadium, V ppm 1 - 2 * fuel V > 2 * fuel V 0 - 3 > 5 
Nickel, Ni ppm 1 - 2 * fuel Ni > 2 * fuel Ni 0 - 3 > 5 
Changing of lubricating oil brand 
Top-up with another lubricating oil brand than being filled to the system is not allowed, 
except if the two lubricating oils originate from the same manufacturer. E.g. if company 
A’s BN 40 oil is filled into the oil system and top-up with same company A’s BN 50 oil is 
desired, that can be done provided that both products are based on same base oils and 
additive technology. Otherwise, the lubricating oil system must be drained and then filled 
with another brand by following the procedure described here below. 
In order to minimize the risk of lubricating oil foaming, deposit formation, blocking of 
lubricating oil filters, damage of engine components, etc., the following procedure should 
be followed when lubricating oil brand is changed from one to another:  
• If possible, change the lubricating oil brand in connection with an engine (piston) 
overhaul. 
• Drain the old lubricating oil from the lubricating oil system. 
• Clean the lubricating oil system in case of an excessive amounts of deposits on the 
surfaces of the engine components, like crankcase, camshaft compartment, etc. 
• Fill the lubricating oil system with fresh lubricating oil. 

===== PAGE 9 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q001, Issue 7, Page 9 / 9 
If the procedure described above is not followed, responsibility of possible damages and 
malfunctions caused by the lubricating oil change should always be agreed between the 
oil company and customer. 
Environmental aspects and handling 
Fresh lubricating oils normally contain no particular toxic hazard, but all lubricants should 
always be handled with great care. Used lubricating oils may contain significant amounts 
of harmful metal and PAH (Poly-Aromatic Hydrocarbon) compounds. Avoid prolonged or 
repetitive contact with the skin and breathing of oil fumes. Prevent any risk of splashing 
and keep away from heat, ignition sources and oxidising agents. Risk of long-term 
contamination of the soil and the ground water. Take appropriate measures  to prevent 
water and soil contamination. 
Store in tight and leak proof containers protected from water and condensation. Avoid 
increased temperatures and large temperature fluctuations. 
Contact  
For services, spare parts and/or tools, please contact your nearest Wärtsilä 
representative or log in to Wärtsilä Online: www.wartsila.com/wartsila-online 
If you do not have the contact details at hand, please follow the link: 
www.wartsila.com/contact 
Technical support 
If technical support is needed, please create a Technical Support Request for further 
assistance. When creating the request, please: 
• Specify the service bulletin number WT98Q001 in the subject field. 
• Write the comments or questions in the description field. 
• Attach photos if possible. 
Customers using Wärtsilä Online can create the r equest directly in the system. 
Customers not connected to Wärtsilä Online, please contact your nearest Wärtsilä  
representative. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved 
No part of this publication may be reproduced or copied in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, graphic, photocopying, recording, 
taping or other information retrieval systems) without the prior written permission of the copyright h older. Wärtsilä Finland Oy makes no 
representation, warranty (express or implied) in this publication and assumes no responsibility for the correctness, errors o r omissions for 
information contained herein. Information in this publication is subject to change without notice. Wärtsilä does not assume any liability for the 
consequences of the owner’s/operator’s actions, inactions, and/or decisions made or based upon the information provided herein. 
Unless otherwise expressly set forth, no recommendation contained in this document or any of its appendices is to be construed as provided 
due to a defect of the product, but merely as an improvement of the product and/or the maintenance procedures relating thereto. Any actions 
by the owner/operator as a result of the recommendations are not covered under any warranty provided by Wärtsilä and such act ions will 
thus be at the owners/operators own cost and expense. 
NO LIABILITY WHETHER DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL, IS ASSUMED WITH RESPECT TO THE 
INFORMATION CONTAINED HEREIN. THIS PUBLICATION IS CONFIDENTIAL AND INTENDED FOR INFORMATION PURPOSES 
ONLY. 
 