

===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
Wärtsilä Finland Oy Tel: +358 10 709 0000 www.wartsila.com 
P.O. Box 244 (Teollisuuskatu 1)   
FI-65101 Vaasa 
INSTRUCTIONS  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
For your information 
Engines concerned 
Following 4-stroke gas / dual fuel engines: 
WÄRTSILÄ® 20DF  
WÄRTSILÄ® 25DF 
WÄRTSILÄ® 31DF, 31SG  
WÄRTSILÄ® 32DF, 32GD, 32LNGD  
WÄRTSILÄ® 34DF, 34LPG, 34SG  
WÄRTSILÄ® 46FDF, 46GD  
WÄRTSILÄ® 46TS-DF, 46TS-SG  
WÄRTSILÄ® 50DF, 50SG 
Reference  
18 Lubricating oil system 
10.3 Lubricating oil system 
Introduction  
These instructions are intended as a guide 
for analysing and following up procedures 
for the gas fuelled lubricating oil, in order to 
keep the oil condition at satisfactory levels, 
from the engines point of view. 
The purpose is to increase the availability 
and reliability of the engines and avoid 
extraordinary wear and possible failures 
due to use of inferior quality lubricating oils.  
Validity  
Until further notice.  Replacing issue 9, 
dated 4 April 2023. 
Before taking any action, always check the available 
online systems for the latest revision of this document. 
Any locally stored or printed version is considered to 
be an uncontrolled document. 
Issue 10, 23 July 2024 
Gas engine lubricating oil 
analysing and quality follow-up 
 Distribution to operators and owners of installations 
concerned 
 
WT98Q002 4-Stroke Engines 
Technical Services 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q002, Issue 10, Page 2 / 8 
Document history 
Issue Date Description SBWT ID 
8 06-08-2020 W46FDF included. 003481 
9 04-04-2023 W46TS-DF and W46TS-SG included. 004979 
10 23-07-2024 W25DF included. 005571 
Contents 
 Page 
1 Introduction 2 
2 Recommendation 2 
3 Sampling 3 
4 Analysis 3 
5 Elemental analysis 6 
6 Changing of lubricating oil brand 7 
7 Environmental aspects and handling 8 
8 Related documents 8 
 
1 Introduction 
The lubricating oil has a variety of different functions in the engine; the most important in 
addition to lubrication are to: 
• Reduce friction. 
• Prevent metal to metal contact. 
• Prevent corrosion. 
• Act as a cooling media. 
• Improve engine cleanliness. 
• Act as a sealing media. 
These instructions are intended as a guide for analysing and following up procedures for 
the gas fuelled engine lubricating oils, in order to keep the oil condition at satisfactory 
levels, from the engines point of view. Deteriorated physical and chemical properties may 
have significant effect on the performance of the lubricating oil in the above listed 
functions, resulting in considerably decreased component service lifetimes, increased 
risk of failures, etc. negative consequences for the operating of the engine. 
2 Recommendation 
Table 1 on page 3 presents a summary of the condemning limits and recommended 
levels for optimum performance for used lubricating oils, along with the main impacts on 
the engine performance, for continuous natural gas operation. For more detailed info on 
condemning limits for LFO/HFO operation or alternate operation on LFO/HFO/LBF and 
natural gas see bulletins WT98Q001 and WS02N001 / 3104DS016 (W31DF). 
Typical wear elemental contents for WÄRTSILÄ ® medium speed gas engines are 
presented in Table 2 on page 7. Each of the properties listed in these tables is also 
discussed in more detail in the chapters below. 
  

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q002, Issue 10, Page 3 / 8 
3 Sampling 
The lubricating oil samples should be taken from circulating oil with the engine in 
operation. The sample should be taken after possible separation and filtration of the oil, 
before the engine. It is recommended to take lubricating oil samples before addin g 
(topping up) new oil to the system. Use clean sample bottles and rinse the sampling line 
properly before taking the sample, a suitable sample amount is 0.75 - 1 litres. The 
background data needed for evaluating the analysis results should always be provi ded 
with an oil sample, use for example the document WT98V001 Oil analysis application. 
During the first year of operation it is advisable to take lubricating oil samples at 500 
hours intervals. Frequent lubricating oil sampling and analysing every 500 - 1000 hours 
is also recommendable after the first year of operation. 
4 Analysis 
The lubricating oil samples should be analysed for example by the oil supplier or by some 
other recognised oil analysis laboratory. The preferred analysis methods are specified in 
Table 1. 
Table 1, Summary of the most important lubricating oil properties 
Property Impacts on engine function Condemning limit Recommended level for 
optimum performance 
Base Number (BN) 
(mg KOH / g)  
ASTM D 2896 
Prevents corrosion.  Max. 50% depletion from 
fresh oil level. 
Max. 50% depletion from 
fresh oil level. 
Viscosity 
(cSt, at 100/40C) 
ASTM D 445 
Provides hydrodynamic 
lubrication for bearings, etc. 
Reduces friction and thus fuel oil 
consumption. 
Max. + 25% increase and 
-20% decrease, at 100C. 
Max. + 50%  increase 
and -25% decrease, at 
40C. 
Max. + 15% from fresh oil 
levels, at 100C. 
Max. + 25% from fresh oil 
levels, at 40C. 
Flash point, PMCC 
Flash point, COC  
(C) 
ASTM D93, ASTM 
D92 
Mainly safety relate issues. Min. 170C 
Min. 190C 
Min. 170C 
Min. 190C 
Water 
(vol-%) or (w-%) 
ASTM D 95 or 
D 6304C 
Introduces corrosion. 
Deteriorates the hydrodynamic 
properties of the oil. 
Affects additive function. 
Max 0.3 vol-% / w-%. Max 0.3 vol-% / w-%. 
Insolubles 
(w-%) 
ASTM D 893b 
Deteriorates the hydrodynamic 
properties of the oil. 
Affects additive function. 
Max. 1.0 w-%, as 
n-pentane insolubles.. 
Max. 1.0 w-%, as 
n-pentane insolubles. 
Total Acid Number 
(TAN) 
(mg KOH / g) 
ASTM D 664  
Corrosion. Oxidation and nitration 
(ageing) of lube oil compounds. 
Possible lacquer and deposit 
formations. 
Max. 2.5 mg KOH/g 
increase from fresh oil 
levels. 
Max. 2.5 mg KOH/g 
increase from fresh oil 
levels. 
Oxidation 
(Abs/cm)  
IR 
Possible lacquer and deposit 
formations. Viscosity increase. Max. 25 Max. 25 
Nitration 
(Abs/cm)  
IR 
Possible lacquer and deposit 
formations. Viscosity increase. Max. 20 Max. 20 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q002, Issue 10, Page 4 / 8 
Base number, BN (TBN, Total Base Number) 
The Base number is a measure of the alkalinity of the lubricating oil, expressed in mg 
KOH/g oil. Too low Base number levels in the lubricating oil increase the risks of acidic 
corrosion, engine wear, reduced component lifetime, etc. and thus increased 
maintenance costs. 
For spark ignited (SG) engines operated continuously on gas it is recommended to use 
low ash gas engine oils, with a BN of 4 – 7 for fresh oils. For dual fuel (DF) engines the 
lubricating oil quality and BN should be chosen according to used fuel quality a nd 
operating hours on the different fuel qualities, see more detailed info and 
recommendations in bulletin WS02N001 / 3104DS016 (W31DF). 
Typically, the BN of lubricating oil drops faster in the beginning but gradually levels out 
towards an equilibrium level. The minimum allowed BN level for continuous gas fuel 
operation is 50% depletion from fresh oil levels. 
Viscosity 
Viscosity is the property of a fluid that causes flow resistance. The viscosity of oils is 
dependent on temperature, pressure, and shear rate. Viscosity is one of the most 
significant properties for establishing the thickness, pressure, and temperature of an oil 
film in lubrication. Oil film thickness increases with viscosity, as does the fluids friction 
and consequential power loss. Viscosity is also a significant factor in predicting the 
performance and fatigue life of bearings and gears.  
The official SI unit of kinematic viscosity is m2/s, but cSt (centistoke) is still commonly 
used for expressing lubricating oil viscosity. 1 cSt = 10 -6 m2/s (= 1 mm2/s).  
Typical viscosity for a fresh SAE 40 grade lubricating oil is 13.0 – 15.0 cSt (at 100 °C) 
and 125 – 150 cSt (at 40 °C). 
Viscosity Index (VI) is a commonly used expression of an oils change of viscosity with 
temperature. The higher the viscosity index the smaller the relative change in viscosity 
with temperature. Most gas engine oils have a VI between 95 and 110. 
Typically, the viscosity of lubricating oils could be expected to increase gradually during 
operation, due to oxidation, nitration and polymerisation (ageing) of the lubricating oil 
compounds, increase of solid contents in the oil, etc. 
The lubricating oil condemning limits for WÄRTSILÄ medium speed gas engines for the 
viscosity are: 
• Max. + 25% increase from fresh oil levels, at 100C. 
• Max. + 50% increase from fresh oil levels, at 40C. 
The recommended viscosity changes for optimum performance  of the lubricating oil in 
the engine are: 
• Max. ± 15% from fresh oil levels, at 100 °C. 
• Max. ± 25% increase from fresh oil levels, at 40 °C. 
Water 
Water in oil is detrimental to lubrication, both physically and chemically. Water is slightly 
soluble in base oils and slightly more soluble (a few hundred ppm) in formulated oils. 
Generally, the solubility of water in lubricating oils is however, due to the polar 
characteristics of the water molecule, low. If increased amounts of water molecules are 
present the oil gets saturated and free water appears. Hazy oil is most often a result of 
not dissolved water droplets. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q002, Issue 10, Page 5 / 8 
Water corrodes many common tribological metals and may thus also contribute to 
various forms of corrosive and cavitation damages on bearing surfaces. Bearings 
consisting mostly of lead and tin are quite easily oxidised in the presence of water and 
oxygen. Corrosion products may also contribute to the solid debris in the oil and pit 
formation in the metal surfaces. Another indication of water contamination in lubricating 
oils may be increased sodium and chlorine contents, especially in the installations using 
sea water for cooling. 
Water also catalyses oil oxidation and acid formation and may react with or precipitate 
the oil additive compounds, the base oil and with suspended contaminants. The effects 
of all these reactions are undesirable by -products such as varnish, lacquer, sludg e, 
organic and inorganic acids, surface deposits and lubricant thickening (polymerisation). 
These reaction products also consume the oxidation inhibitors of the lubricating oil.  
A simple test for water in oil is the "crackle test", where a drop of oil is placed onto a hot 
surface, if it crackles and sputters too high quantities of water may be present in the oil. 
The maximum allowed water content in the engine lubricating oil is 0.3 vol-% (or weight-
%). 
Insolubles 
Hard solid particles, which may be present in lubricating oil systems are for example 
shop debris such as welding or grinding splatter (in new systems), sand, clay, etc. earth 
materials and wear fragments. If their size is close to the oil film thickness, they may 
embed or abrade surfaces, thus reducing component lifetime. Abrasion can be detected 
on a worn part by observation of parallel scratches in the direction of sliding or by 
microchips and abrasive particles presence in the used oil.  
Semi-solid contaminants are generally oxidation and/or thermal polymerisation products, 
carbonaceous material, microorganisms and oil/ additive/water reaction products, etc. In 
lubricated systems, these and other small particulates contribute to sludge, wh ich 
collects and plugs pipes, pumps and orifices possibly resulting in too low oil flow. If there 
are oxidation products present, they can be measured by an increase in TAN, pentane- 
and toluene insolubles, IR spectrums and the amount of filter residue.  
The maximum allowed insolubles level is 1.0 w-% (as n-pentane insolubles).  
Total Acid Number 
Total Acid Number (TAN) is generally used for industrial lubricants, such as turbine and 
hydraulic oils, which are not detergent inhibited but can also be used for example for 
engine oils. TAN is a measure of the total amount of acidic species in the lubri cant. 
Observe that also in new oils there are some acidic components present, TAN for fresh 
oils is typically between 0.5 – 2.5 mg KOH/g and gradually increase during operation, 
due to the oil being subjected to increased temperatures, etc. 
The maximum allowed TAN level increase is + 2.5 mg KOH/g, from fresh oil level. 
Oxidation and Nitration 
Oxidation and nitration are indicators of the ageing of the lubricating oil compounds and 
molecules. They are measured with infrared spectroscopy and are together with viscosity 
and BN one of the important measures of the gas engine lubricating oil service condition. 
The oxidation products are measured at 5.9 µm and nitration compounds at 6.1, 6.4, 7.9 
and 11.8 µm wavelength. 
The maximum allowed oxidation is 25 Abs/cm and the maximum allowed nitration is 20 
Abs/cm. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q002, Issue 10, Page 6 / 8 
5 Elemental analysis 
Elements are here divided into three groups according to their origin. However, note that 
some elements belong to several groups and that different construction materials may 
be used in different engine types, i.e. component specifications should be checke d in 
each case, before making any detailed conclusions. 
1. Wear metals 
The most common wear metals in lubricating oil analyses are iron (Fe), chromium 
(Cr), lead (Pb), copper (Cu) and tin (Sn). In engine components also smaller amounts 
of aluminium (Al), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni) and antimony (Sb) can be present. 
The iron content in lubricating oils reflects mainly piston and cylinder liner wear. Fresh 
oil may also contain small amounts (< 15 ppm) of iron, originating from transfer 
pipelines or tanks, if the oil is not delivered as a bulk. Note that iron may also be used 
as an additive in some lubricating oil formulations. 
The chromium content in lubricating oils indicates mainly piston ring wear. 
Lead can be present in the overlays of gudgeon pin bearing bushings, camshaft 
bearings, bearing bushing for camshaft end and thrust washer.  
Copper can enter the lubricating oil from lubricating oil pump bearings, bronze 
bearings of rocker arms, roller pins for tappets and gudgeon pin bearing bushings. If 
the Cu content is abnormally high (> 10 - 15 ppm), one possible reason is presence 
of exhaust ga ses in the inlet air, for example from some nearby located external 
sources. If there are exhaust gases present in the inlet air, the sulphur compounds 
from the exhaust gases may gradually corrode the charge air cooler material, which 
contains copper. The copper will then enter the lubricant via the combustion space 
and blow-by gases to the crankcase. 
Some lubricating oil systems may also include couplings, coolers, etc. components of 
the engines and thus introduce significant amounts of for example Cu to the 
lubricating oil. Lube oil analyses from such systems should always be judged with 
special attention and carefulness. In such cases these elements cannot be directly 
used to evaluate engine component condition. 
Possible sources for tin are big end bearings, main bearings, gudgeon pin bearing 
bushings, camshaft bearings, bearing bushing of camshaft end and thrust washer. 
Aluminium and nickel may enter the lubricating oil from engine parts. 
2. External source elements 
Presence of sodium can indicate sea water leakage  through the central coolers or 
water leakage in the closed cooling water system. The most commonly used cooling 
water additives are sodium nitrite + sodium borate and sodium molybdate based 
products. 
3. Lubricating oil additives 
Calcium (Ca), phosphorus (P) and zinc (Zn) are normally used in lubricating oil 
additive packages. The calcium content is depending on the BN, the higher the BN 
the higher the Ca content.   
The phosphorus and zinc contents are depending on the additive chemistry used in 
each specific case and can vary significantly. In most low ash lubricating oils used in 
the WÄRTSILÄ® medium-speed gas engines the P content of the fresh oil is around 
200 - 300 ppm and the Zn content around 200 - 300 ppm. In used lubricating oils 
these values can be somewhat lower. 
Silicon, (Si) is typically used as an antifoaming component in lubricating oils. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q002, Issue 10, Page 7 / 8 
Typical elemental contents in used oils 
Table 2 presents typical contents of different elements in used lubricating oils for gas 
engines. The table also shows guidance values for what can be considered abnormal 
levels for different elements in used oils. 
The limits in Table 2 should be kept as guidelines only. Elemental concentrations above 
the abnormal levels call for attention and indicate that something abnormal is obviously 
happening in the engine or in the lubricating oil system. An engine inspection is worth to 
consider especially if the values being abo ve the abnormal levels show a continuously 
increasing trend.  
It should be noted that typical elemental concentrations may be slightly different for 
different engine types. Differences can also be found depending on engine application 
(power plant, main engine, auxiliary engine, etc.) and lubricating oil system configuration 
(couplings included or not, etc.). 
Table 2, Typical and abnormal contents of different elements in used lubricating oils  
Element Unit Typical values Abnormal level 
Iron, Fe ppm 5 - 15 > 25 
Chromium, Cr ppm 0 - 3 > 5 
Tin, Sn ppm 0 - 3 > 5 
Lead, Pb ppm 0 - 3 > 5 
Copper, Cu1) ppm 0 - 5 > 15 
Silicon, Si ppm 1 - 15 > 20 
Sodium, Na ppm 0 - 10 > 20 
Aluminium, Al ppm 0 - 5 > 10 
Nickel, Ni ppm 0 - 3 > 5 
1) Some lubricating oil systems may also include couplings, coolers, etc. components of the 
engine and thus introduce significant amounts of for example Cu to the lubricating oil. In such 
cases these elements cannot be directly used to evaluate engine compone nt condition. Cu 
contents of 5 – 40 ppm have been recorded in some cases without recording any drawbacks 
in engine component condition or performance. 
6 Changing of lubricating oil brand 
Top-up with another lubricating oil brand than being filled to the system is not allowed, 
except if the both two lubricating oils originate from the same manufacturer. E.g. if 
company A’s BN 30 oil is filled into the oil system and top-up with same company A’s BN 
40 oil is desired, that can be done provided that both products are based on same base 
oils and additive technology. Otherwise the lubricating oil system must be drained and 
then filled with another brand by following the procedure described here below. 
If the main fuel type is changed from natural gas to light fuel oil or heavy fuel oil, or vice 
versa, change the lubricating oil to a suitable product  for the specific engine type . See 
section 8 for a list of bulletins with approved lubricating oils.  
In order to minimize the risk of lubricating oil foaming, deposit formation, blocking of 
lubricating oil filters, damage of engine components, etc., the following procedure should 
be followed when lubricating oil brand is changed from one to another:  
  

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved – Please read the complete disclaimer at the end of this document.  
  
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
WT98Q002, Issue 10, Page 8 / 8 
• If possible, change the lubricating oil brand in connection with an engine (piston) 
overhaul. 
• Drain the old lubricating oil from the lubricating oil system. 
• Clean the lubricating oil system in case of an excessive amounts of deposits on the 
surfaces of the engine components, like crankcase, camshaft compartment, etc. 
• Fill the lubricating oil system with fresh lubricating oil. 
If the procedure described above is not followed, responsibility of possible damages and 
malfunctions caused by the lubricating oil change should always be agreed between the 
oil company and customer. 
7 Environmental aspects and handling 
Fresh lubricating oils normally contain no particular toxic hazard, but all lubricants should 
always be handled with great care. Used lubricating oils may contain significant amounts 
of harmful metal and PAH (Poly-Aromatic Hydrocarbon) compounds. Avoid prolonged or 
repetitive contact with the skin and breathing of oil fumes. Prevent any risk of splashing 
and keep away from heat, ignition sources and oxidising agents. Risk of long -term 
contamination of the soil and the ground water. Take appropriate measures  to prevent 
water and soil contamination. 
Store in tight and leak proof containers protected from water and condensation. Avoid 
increased temperatures and large temperature fluctuations. 
8 Related documents 
• WS02N001 Lubricating oils for WÄRTSILÄ ® 20DF, 32DF, 34DF, 46FDF and 50DF 
engines 
• WS02N003 Lubricating oils for WÄRTSILÄ® 34LPG, 34SG and 50SG engines 
• 3104DS016 Lubricating oils for WÄRTSILÄ® 25DF, 31DF and 46TSDF engines 
• 3104DS009 Lubricating oils for WÄRTSILÄ® 31SG engines 
• 3202N043 Lubricating oils for WÄRTSILÄ® Vasa 32 engines (32GD and 32LNGD) 
• 4602N100 Lubricating oils for WÄRTSILÄ® 46 and 46GD engines 
• WT98Q001 Lubricating oil analysing and quality follow-up (engines running on liquid 
fuel) 
• WT98V001 Oil analysis application 
Contact  
For services, spare parts and/or tools, please contact your nearest Wärtsilä 
representative or log in to Wärtsilä Online: www.wartsila.com/wartsila-online 
If you do not have the contact details at hand, please follow the link: 
www.wartsila.com/contact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 Wärtsilä Finland Oy – All rights reserved 
No part of this publication may be reproduced or copied in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, graphic, photocopying, recording, 
taping or other information retrieval systems) without the prior written permission of the copyright h older. Wärtsilä Finland Oy makes no 
representation, warranty (express or implied) in this publication and assumes no responsibility for the correctness, errors o r omissions for 
information contained herein. Information in this publication is subject to change without notice. Wärtsilä does not assume any liability for the 
consequences of the owner’s/operator’s actions, inactions, and/or decisions made or based upon the information provided herein. 
Unless otherwise expressly set forth, no recommendation contained in this document or any of its appendices is to be construed as provided 
due to a defect of the product, but merely as an improvement of the product and/or the maintenance procedures relating thereto. Any actions 
by the owner/operator as a result of the recommendations are not covered under any warranty provided by Wärtsilä and such act ions will 
thus be at the owners/operators own cost and expense. 
NO LIABILITY WHETHER DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL, IS ASSUMED WITH RESPECT TO THE 
INFORMATION CONTAINED HEREIN. THIS PUBLICATION IS CONFIDENTIAL AND INTENDED FOR INFORMATION PURPOSES 
ONLY. 
 